## Summary

This explains the template files in this project.

## Overview

The templates show the following items regarding articles:

* File name
* Use of Headers and Sections in Pages
* Use of Images
* Use of (generally inline) Links

The [999.1_FooTest_Template_OTG-FOO-001.md](999.1_FooTest_Template_OTG-FOO-001.md) is a sample implementation of this template.

### File name

The file name is as follows:

`[chapter].[section]_Article_Name_OTG-[CODE]-[NUMBER].md`

1. Chapter is only one integer.
2. Section can have multiple levels, where each level is in a folder. For example, Chapter 4 has multiple levels of sections. You can refer to that section to check.
3. The article name is in Title_Case separated by the underscore "_". The use of the underscore is to make it easier to encode urls, i.e. to avoid `%20` that looks unsightly in links
4. Every distinct test has a code, including OTG-INFO-001 . If you are documenting up a completely new category of test, you may give that its own unique code. Ask around in the Github Issue related to the article you are writing if you are unsure about the code.
5. All text in this project is markdown format (.md)

### Headers and Sections

Most pages, unless they are themselves a summary, will have a summary section at level H2 `## Summary` to start the article. The summary is a quick description of the test. Other sections of a page may vary depending on the test. Common sections to use are:

* __Test Objectives__ : Describe the business value of the test 
* __How to Test__ : Describe what a tester is supposed to do if they want to run this test
* - Break the "How to Test" into multiple subsections at your discretion
* __References__ : If a lot of the article came from a specification or other long document, you may use a References section. However, try to use [inline-style links](https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet#links) if possible.

### Use of Images

Images and other resources should be placed in the same folder as the page. It is OK to duplicate an image file if it is used in multiple sections or chapters.

### Links

As mentioned for headers and sections, [inline-style links](https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet#links) are favoured in the newer pages of this project. The use of inline links is better for the flow of the document, and it prevents duplicating a link or reference to a resource. (Any time something is duplicated, one of the "duplicates" becomes out of sync with the other one, and that leads to confusion later.) We are going through older sections to change pages that used different styles to link to tools or other guides.


